Desmond Elliot (born Desmond Oluwashola Elliot; 4 February 1974) is a Nigerian director, and politician He was elected as a lawmaker of the Lagos State House of Assembly, Surulere Constituency, in the 11 April 2015 Nigerian General Elections. Elliot competed to become the ambassador for the Face of Hope Project, a "volunteer-based non-profit, non-religious, non-political organization established to give hope to the hopeless", in which he will work toward fixing "child illiteracy in Nigeria and Africa at large" should he emerge. He won best supporting actor in a drama at the 2nd Africa Magic Viewers Choice Awards and was nominated for best supporting actor at the 10th Africa Movie Academy Awards.


== Early life ==
Elliot was born to a Yoruba father from Olowogbowo in Lagos Island, Lagos and a mother from Illah in Oshimili North, Delta State . He received his primary education at Air Force Primary School and later attended St John's College, both in Jos. He studied economics at Lagos State University and graduated in 2003.


== Career ==
Elliot was influenced by a friend to become an actor. He started playing roles in soap operas like Everyday People, One Too Much and Saints and Sinners. He is one of Nollywood's leading actors, having appeared in over two hundred films including Men Who Cheat, Yahoo Millionaire and Atlanta. In 2006, he was nominated for the African Movie Academy Award for "Best Actor in a Supporting Role" in the movie "Behind closed doors". In 2008, Elliot co-produced and co-directed the movie "Reloaded" which received 3 nominations at the African Movie Academy Awards in 2009. In 2009 and 2010, He was nominated for the Best Actor category at the Nigeria Entertainment Awards.Also in 2010, Elliot competed to become the ambassador for the Face of Hope Project, a "volunteer-based non-profit, non-religious, non-political organization established to give hope to the hopeless", in which he will work toward fixing "child illiteracy in Nigeria and Africa at large" should he emerge. In 2014, he was nominated for the African Movie Academy Award for "Best Actor in a Supporting Role" in the movie "Finding Mercy"


== Politics ==
Elliot declared his intentions in September 2014 to run for Lagos State House of Assembly under the All Progressives Congress.
He contested and won the Surulere Constituency in the 11 April 2015 Nigerian General Elections. In October 2020, during the End SARS protest, Desmond was heavily criticized for allegedly supporting Anti-Social Media Bill in Nigeria; an allegation he earlier denied when the news first filtered in via social media. In a viral video circulating all over the internet, he was seen vehemently criticizing social media users and influencers and stating that if the Nigerian state doesn't stop social media, social media will destroy the Nigerian state. His comments were not taken lightly by Nigerians on social media and thus the popular Nigerian pidgin slang, na Desmond Elliot cause am, meaning It's Desmond Elliot's fault, was born.
He however came out few days later to apologize. He said “I allowed my emotions get the better of me and for this I apologize to everyone my earlier statements may have hurt. Please, understand that even the best of us make mistakes. This is why, moving forward, I ask that we all try to engage constructively on the issues that affect all of us. I promise to do the same. The pain that I feel for my constituents, the calls for assistance that I continue to get, and the need to mitigate against further destruction and violence will continue to drive my engagements and my work. I thank you all for expressing your views, and in the future, I promise to be more conscious and aware. Together, we will build a better Nigeria"
Desmond Elliot is presently seeking a third term as state legislator representing Surulere Constituency 1. Although, his nomination by the party (APC) during his two terms in office came unopposed, he faces strong opposition going into the 2023 general elections, as a host of aspirants (including Honourable Barakat Bakare Akande, the sitting Council leader of Surulere Local Government) have declared intention to also vie for the ticket.


== Personal life ==
Elliot is married and has four children. He is involved in public relations for Globacom.Desmond Elliot celebrated his 15th wedding anniversary with his wife, Victoria Elliot on 26 December 2018.


== Filmography ==


== Television ==
Everyday People (Soap Opera)
One Too Much (Soap Opera)
Saints and Sinners (Soap Opera)
Santalal
Super Story


== See also ==
List of Yoruba people


== References ==


== External links ==
Desmond Elliot at IMDb