Dušan Bogdanović (Serbian: Душан Богдановић) (born 1955) is a Serbian-born American composer and classical guitarist. He has explored musical languages which are reflected in his style today: a synthesis of classical, jazz, and ethnic music. As a soloist and in collaboration with other artists, he has toured extensively throughout Europe, Japan, and the U.S. He has taught at the University of Southern California, San Francisco Conservatory, and the Geneva University of Music.
His performing and recording activities include work with chamber ensembles of diverse stylistic orientations: the Falla Guitar Trio; a harpsichord and guitar duo with Elaine Comparone; and jazz collaborations with Anthony Cox, Charlie Haden, James Newton, Milcho Leviev, Arto Tunçboyacıyan, and others. Notably, he is a co-author with Sting on "Prisms (Six Song by Sting)" published by Singidunum Music and Steerpike Overseas Limited.
Dušan Bogdanović's recording credits include close to twenty albums (on Intuition, Doberman, Ess.a.y, M.A. Recordings, GSP and other labels), ranging from Bach Trio Sonatas to contemporary works. Over two hundred of his compositions are published by Bèrben Editions (Italy), Doberman-Yppan (Canada) and Guitar Solo publications (San Francisco).
His theoretical work includes polyrhythmic and polymetric studies, as well as a bilingual publication covering three-voice counterpoint and Renaissance improvisation for guitar (Bèrben) and Ex Ovo. (Doberman-Yppan). He has also collaborated on multi-disciplinary projects involving music, psychology, philosophy, and fine arts.


== Partial discography ==
Worlds, M.A (1989)
Keys to Talk By, M.A (1992)
Bach with Pluck! ESS.A.Y  (1992)
Levantine Tales, M.A (1992)
Bach with Pluck! Vol. 2, ESS.A.Y (1994)
In the Midst of Winds, (1994)
Mysterious Habitats, Guitar Solo Publications, (1995)
Unconscious in Brazil, Guitar Solo Publications (1999)
Yano Mori, Intuition (1999)
Canticles, Editions Doberman (2001)
Early to Rise, (Palo Alto, 2003)
And Yet..., Editions Doberman (2005)
Winter Tale, Editions Doberman (2008)
Look at the Big Birds, Carmen Alvarez, Francisco Bernier, Contrastes (2014)
En la tierra, Editions Doberman (2015)
Bogdanovic: Guitar Music, Angelo Marchese, Brilliant Classics (2015)


== Partial list of works ==


== Critical and scholarly studies ==
Kishimine, Hiroshi. A Close Look Into the Diverse World of Dusan Bogdanovic; discovering influences through analyses of selected solo guitar works. DMA diss., Shenandoah Conservatory, Virginia, 2007.
Yen, Ruey Shyang, Exoticism in Modern Guitar Music: works of Carlo Domeniconi; Ravi Shankar; Benjamin Britten; Dusan Bogdanovic. DMA diss. Arizona State University, 1996.
Curry, Jane, Balkan ecumene and synthesis in selected compositions for classical guitar by Bogdanovic, Mamangakis and Ian Krouse D.M.A. diss.Arizona State University 2010, 89 pages ; AAT 3434345
Hong Chu Tee, Modern Classical Guitar its use of Scordatura: a Historical Background and its Exploration from the Late Twentieth Century to the Present, A Dissertation submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements of University of Glamorgan for the degree of MMus, 2012, pages 50–56
Morey II, Michael J., A Pedagogical and Analytical Study of Dušan Bogdanović’s Polyrhythmic and Polymetric Studies for Guitar, diss. D.M.A., University of North Texas,2011
García Álvarez, Ma. Carmen. "Dusan Bogdanovic (Serbia 1955 -) Eclecticismo musical en su obra para guitarra". Andalucía educa, no. 109. (Julio 2013) p. 8-9.
Samuele Benvenuti," Jazz Sonata di Dusan Bogdanovic contestualizzazione e spunti analitici,"Università degli studi di Pavia, Laurea in musicologia, 2013-2014
Clarysse Silke, Dušan Bogdanović, een componist in dialoog met de wereld ; Etnologische invloeden op "Six Balkan Miniatures", "3 African Sketches" en op het oeuvre van Dušan Bogdanović in het algemeen.  D. M. A., Leuven University College of Arts, 2014
Counterpoint for Guitar, (Bèrben, 1996)


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Bogdanovic, Dusan, "Verso une nuova sintesi" - article with biographical ref., GuitArt November/December 1996; pp. 31–37.
Attademo, Luigi, "La mia ricerca, tra composizione e innovazione" - Dusan Bogdanovic interview, GuitArt 1999, No. XV, pp. 4–9.
Martinez, Emma, Dusan Bogdanovic interview, Classical Guitar Magazine, UK, 1998, pp. 11–20.


== External links ==
Official Homepage
Les Éditions Doberman-Yppan
Haute école de musique de Genève
Multimod Performer-Composer Festival
Bogdanovic YouTube   Channel