Filipe Miguel Neves Ferreira (born 27 September 1990) is a Portuguese professional footballer who plays for Boavista F.C. mainly as a left-back but also as a left midfielder.
He made over 175 appearances in the Primeira Liga, mostly for Belenenses but also Nacional, Tondela and Boavista.


== Club career ==
Born in Lisbon, Ferreira began his senior career at hometown club Atlético Clube de Portugal in the third division, winning promotion in 2010–11 and making his professional debut in the Segunda Liga the following season. A year later, he moved across the league and the capital city to C.F. Os Belenenses, playing 19 matches in all competitions as the team won the league title; he subsequently extended his contract from 2014 to the following year.Ferreira featured regularly in his debut campaign in the Primeira Liga, and scored the winner in a 2–1 home victory over S.C. Braga on 2 February 2014 that ended a nine-game winless run. In July 2016, once his contract expired, he signed a two-year deal at F.C. Paços de Ferreira in the same competition.In July 2018, Ferreira moved abroad for the first time, signing for SK Sturm Graz of the Austrian Football Bundesliga. Having made only four appearances in all tournaments, he returned the following January to his own country's top flight by joining C.D. Nacional on loan until 30 June; his registration at the Madeiran club was delayed for bureaucratic reasons.Following Nacional's relegation, in July 2019 Ferreira made a permanent move back to the top tier on a two-year contract at C.D. Tondela. On 12 July 2021, he signed with Boavista F.C. for one season.


== International career ==
Ferreira played twice for the Portugal under-21 side, in March 2011 friendlies. He earned his first cap against the Republic of Ireland (2–0 win), and his second three days later against Denmark (1–1).


== Personal life ==
Ferreira's father, José Carlos, was also a footballer and a defender.


== References ==


== External links ==
Filipe Ferreira at ForaDeJogo (archived)
Filipe Ferreira national team profile at the Portuguese Football Federation (in Portuguese)
Filipe Ferreira at Soccerway