Jean-Paul Lewis (born 20 October 1993) is a South African professional rugby union player for thePumas in the Currie Cup and in the Rugby Challenge. He usually plays as a winger and has occasionally played as an outside centre.


== Rugby career ==


=== Schoolboy rugby ===
Lewis was born and bred in Stellenbosch. He represented Western Province at various youth levels, from as early as primary school level when he played for them in the 2006 Under-13 Craven Week tournament. He then attended Paul Roos Gymnasium, once again earning several selections; he played at the Under-16 Grant Khomo Week in 2009 and at the Under-18 Craven Week the following year. After the 2010 Craven Week, he was also included in a South Africa Schools squad that played against their Namibian counterparts in Johannesburg. Lewis started the match and scored one of his side's 14 tries in a 92–21 victory.Lewis was again selected to represent Western Province at the 2011 Craven Week, scoring tries against Border and the Pumas in his two matches. Another call-up to the South African Schools team followed and Lewis again contributed a try, helping South Africa to a 21–14 victory over France A in Port Elizabeth.


=== Western Province / Maties ===
After school, Lewis joined the Cape Town-based Western Province academy and was the main left winger for their Under-19 squad that participated in the 2012 Under-19 Provincial Championship, starting thirteen of their fourteen matches in the competition. After scoring a try in each of their matches against the Golden Lions, Free State and SWD, he scored a brace in their return leg against the Golden Lions and a hat-trick against the Blue Bulls. His eight tries – the second-most by a Western Province player behind Justin Geduld and fourth overall in Group A of the competition – helped Western Province finish top of the log with ten wins in twelve matches. Despite not adding to his try tally in the title play-offs, Williams helped Western Province to a semi-final victory over the Golden Lions and a 22–18 victory in the final against the Blue Bulls. The only match that he missed during the season – their Round twelve match against the Sharks – was due to him playing for the Western Province U21 squad in the 2012 Under-21 Provincial Championship in a defeat to the Sharks U21s.At the start of 2013, Lewis played Varsity Cup rugby with the Maties, the university side from Lewis' hometown of Stellenbosch. He got off to a fantastic start in the competition, scoring two tries in their 29–8 victory over UJ in the opening round of the competition. He scored another against UFS Shimlas a week later, and a third against Western Cape rivals UCT Ikey Tigers. He made three starts and an appearance off the bench during a regular season that saw Maties win all seven of their matches to finish top of the log. He was an unused replacement in their 16–15 victory over the NMMU Madibaz in the semi-final, but did get game time in the final, coming on for the final half an hour of a 5–44 defeat to UP Tuks. He made ten appearances for the Western Province Under-21 team in the 2013 Under-21 Provincial Championship, scoring tries against Border, Free State and the Leopards. Western Province finished top of the log to qualify for the play-offs and Lewis came on for the final few minutes of normal time in their semi-final match against the Golden Lions. The match finished 34–all, but Western Province eventually won the match 44–41 after extra time. Lewis was an unused replacement in their 30–23 victory over the Blue Bulls a week later.At the start of 2014, Lewis was included in Western Province's Vodacom Cup squad. He made his first class debut on 8 March 2014, as his side beat Boland Cavaliers 16–8. He scored his first senior try a week later in a 7–25 defeat to the Sharks XV, following that up with tries against the Eastern Province Kings and the Border Bulldogs in his next two matches. He started all seven of their matches during the regular season, as well as their quarter final defeat to the Pumas. He played in his third Under-21 Provincial Championship in the second half of 2014, again being a key player for the team by starting eleven of their twelve matches during the regular season. He scored a total of six tries – two in their 90–0 victory over Border U21 in East London, one against the Golden Lions and in the return match against Border in Cape Town, and another two against the Leopards in Potchefstroom – to help Western Province finish top of the log with just one defeat. Lewis started their 41–17 victory over Free State U21 in the semi-final, but could not prevent his team losing in the final, with the Blue Bulls winning 20–10 in Cape Town.After not featuring in the competition in 2014, Lewis returned to Varsity Cup action with Maties in 2015. He started in all seven of their matches, scoring three tries – two against Western Cape rivals UCT Ikey Tigers and a third against UP Tuks – in a disappointing season for Maties which saw them miss out on a semi-final spot for only the second time in the competition's history. Despite his side misfiring, Lewis' performances were noted and he was included in a Varsity Cup Dream Team at the conclusion of the tournament, starting the team's match against a South Africa Under-20 team that prepared for the 2015 World Rugby Under 20 Championship. Lewis rejoined the Western Province Vodacom Cup squad, but failed to score any tries in his five appearances. He featured in their quarter final victory over the Leopards, but didn't play in their semi-final win over the Blue Bulls or their final defeat to the Pumas.Lewis had another proficient season in the 2016 Currie Cup qualification series, which replaced the Vodacom Cup competition. He scored two tries in a 27–20 victory over the Pumas and his first senior hat-trick in a 59–31 victory over the Falcons in Kempton Park in his final match for Western Province.


=== Pumas ===
During the 2016 Currie Cup qualification series, the Nelspruit-based Pumas announced the signing of Lewis, along with fellow Western Province player Devon Williams. Lewis made his debut in their final match of the qualification series, starting on the left wing against the Griffons and scoring two quick-fire tries in the second half to help his new side to a 60–17 victory.Lewis was included in the Pumas squad for the 2016 Currie Cup Premier Division and named in the starting line-up for their opening match of the competition against the Sharks.


== References ==