Louisa Catherine Adams (née Johnson; February 12, 1775 – May 15, 1852) was the first lady of the United States from 1825 to 1829 during the presidency of John Quincy Adams.


== Early life ==
Louisa Catherine Johnson was born in London on February 12, 1775. She was the second daughter of American merchant Joshua Johnson and British woman Catherine Nuth.: 43  The Johnsons were an influential family in American politics, with Louisa's paternal uncle Thomas Johnson being one of the signers of the Declaration of Independence.: 42  Little is known of her mother's life prior to her marriage.: 160 : 92  Louisa's parents may have only married ten years after her birth, potentially making Louisa the only first lady of the United States to be born out of wedlock.: 81  She lived a comfortable life as a child in which all of her needs were seen to.: 43 : 54 Louisa's father supported American independence, and the Johnsons left England in 1778 in response to the American Revolutionary War.: 18  They moved to Nantes, France, where they lived for the next five years. While in France, Louisa attended a Catholic boarding school. She performed well in school, becoming proficient in music and literature, and she learned to speak French fluently.: 43 : 81  Such was her immersion in French that she was later forced to relearn English.: 54  She was also versed in Greek and Latin.: 43  The Johnsons lived in luxury, even when they did not have the financial means to do so.: 160  Their home in France was a mansion that came to be known as "The Temple of Taste".: 93 The Johnsons returned to England and settled in Tower Hill, while Louisa was placed in a London boarding school.: 81  She was teased for her French mannerisms, and the Catholicism that she had learned in France caused conflict with her religious education in England.: 18  Her self-esteem suffered, and she kept a distance from her peers.: 93  She was sent to be educated by John Hewlett, an Anglican minister and a family friend of the Johnsons. Hewlett became a strong influence on her upbringing, encouraging her intellectualism.: 19  The Johnsons suffered financially in 1788, and she was pulled out of school to be educated by a governess.: 81 


== Marriage ==

Johnson's father was appointed the American consul to Britain in 1790, and she often assisted in entertaining prominent guests.: 82  Among these guests, the Johnson daughters looked for potential suitors, as they were pressured to marry a prominent young man.: 24  John Quincy Adams became one such guest in 1795 in his capacity as an American diplomat.: 43  He began showing up each day, and only later did the Johnsons realize that he intended to court Louisa, initially believing that his interest was in her older sister Nancy.: 43 : 164  Only after he complied with a joking request to write her a romantic poem did she consider him a potential suitor.: 26 Johnson and Adams began a courtship, though it was intermittent, and they did not immediately take to one another. Both had previously expressed interest in other potential partners.: 43 : 54  It was their talents and prestige that eventually drew them to one another. Adams in particular was taken by Johnson's aptitude for singing and music.: 164 : 30  This pairing also caused a rivalry between Louisa and her older sister, who was jealous for the man she thought would court her.: 29 Johnson and Adams were engaged by 1796, but Adams left England for work and provided a number of excuses as to why he felt they should not be wed, citing his work, his finances, and their personality conflicts. Another factor the disapproval of his mother, Abigail Adams, who did not wish to see her son marry an Englishwoman.: 43 : 82  They communicated by letter over the following year, and Johnson came to dread their communications, as Adams's letters were humorless and chastising.: 165  Louisa and John eventually married on July 26, 1797, after pressuring from her father.: 44 : 83  Shortly after the marriage, the Johnsons lost the remainder of their fortune. Louisa's parents fled the country, leaving Louisa and John with little financial support and a mob of angry creditors.: 168 : 55  The couple disagreed about how much influence a wife should have in her family, and John often made major decisions without consulting her. Both had strong personalities, and their disagreements often became arguments.: 43 : 55 


== Diplomat's wife ==


=== Prussia ===

John was appointed American minister to Prussia in 1797, and the couple moved to Berlin.: 55  Louisa experienced several miscarriages over the following years, causing poor health that further strained her relationship with her husband. She eventually gave birth to their first child, George Washington Adams, in 1801.: 83–84  She took a prominent role in diplomatic proceedings when she was not ill from pregnancy, and she was popular among the Prussian aristocracy, personally befriending the king and queen.: 170 : 83  John was recalled from Berlin by his father after Thomas Jefferson was elected president, and the family left Prussia for the United States.: 84 


=== United States ===
Adams reunited with her family after arriving at the United States in 1801 while her husband went to his own family home in Quincy, Massachusetts.: 84 : 56  The journey from Washington to Quincy was interrupted by an uncomfortable dinner with the Jefferson family at the White House and a visit to Martha Washington at Mount Vernon, but it was otherwise long and punishing.: 174  Reluctantly, she arrived in Quincy to meet her parents-in-law. While she quickly took to her father-in-law, her mother-in-law remained skeptical of her suitability as a wife.: 84 : 56 Adams's father Joshua died in 1802, severely affecting her and leaving the family with no financial support. When her husband was elected to the United States Senate in 1803, she joined him in alternating between Massachusetts and Washington, D.C., much preferring the latter. Unable to afford a home of their own, the family stayed with John's relatives in Massachusetts and with Louisa's relatives in Washington. She gave birth to John Adams II in 1803.: 44 : 85  She was often left behind while her husband traveled on his own, which she deeply resented. On one such occasion, she suffered a miscarriage.: 85  Their third son, Charles Francis Adams, was born in 1807.: 45  Her husband resigned from the Senate in 1808, having come in disagreement with the Federalist Party over matters of policy.: 182  This disagreement was seen as a betrayal, and the family was thereby excluded from Boston social life.: 183 : 162 


=== Russia ===
When John accepted the position as American minister to Russia in 1809, he did not consult Louisa. He determined that she would accompany him and that their two older sons would stay behind in the United States.: 45  She came to regret these arrangements, feeling that she had failed her sons by leaving them.: 25  She blamed and resented her husband for this, causing a rift in their marriage.: 45 : 183  The 80 day journey to Russia proved unpleasant, and they were constantly wary of French ships that were at war with Russia.: 168  Her opinion did not change after arriving in Saint Petersburg, which she found disagreeable, but her husband ignored her desires to return to the United States.: 184 Just as she did in Berlin, Louisa impressed the Russian court and received special attention from the monarch.: 185 : 27–28  Unable to afford the elaborate outfits expected of Russian courtiers, she came up with excuses to avoid frequent appearances, first feigning illness and then feigning mourning so that her less formal clothes could be excused.: 173  Despite her success, Louisa was unhappy during her time in Russia, as she was separated from her family, regularly ill, and forced to contend with loss.: 45–46 : 57  After suffering another three miscarriages,: 29  Louisa gave birth in 1811 to her first daughter, and the first American born in Russia, Louisa Catherine Adams II.: 86  A year later, the infant died of dysentery, causing Louisa further grief and increasing her resentment against her husband.: 87 When John was called to Ghent in 1814 to negotiate a peace agreement for the War of 1812, Louisa was left in Saint Petersburg, where she would remain for the next year.: 87  John learned to afford her a greater level of trust and responsibility while living in Russia, and in December 1814, he tasked her with selling their property in Russia and traveling across Europe to meet him in Paris.: 46  She left in February 1815, and for the next 40 days she made the dangerous journey across Europe, which had been ravaged Napoleonic Wars, in the cold winter. She was frequently in danger of bandits, and later of French soldiers that were hostile to her Russian carriage.: 30–31  John and his parents gave Louisa a greater deal of respect after she completed the journey.: 88 


=== Return to the United States ===
When John Quincy Adams was appointed James Monroe's Secretary of State in 1817, the family moved to Washington, D.C. where Louisa's drawing room became a center for the diplomatic corps and other notables. Music enhanced her Tuesday evenings at home, and theater parties contributed to her reputation as an outstanding hostess.


== First Lady of the United States ==

The pleasures of moving into the White House in 1825 were dimmed by the bitter politics of the election, paired with her deep depression. Though she continued her weekly "drawing rooms", she preferred quiet evenings of reading, composing music and verse, and playing her harp. As First Lady, she became reclusive and depressed. For a time, she regretted ever having married into the Adams family, the men of which she found cold and insensitive. The necessary entertainments were always elegant and her cordial hospitality made the last official reception a gracious occasion although her husband had lost his bid for re-election and partisan feeling still ran high.
In his diary for June 23, 1828, her husband recorded her "winding silk from several hundred silkworms that she has been rearing," evidently in the White House.Since 1982 Siena College Research Institute has periodically conducted surveys asking historians to assess American first ladies according to a cumulative score on the independent criteria of their background, value to the country, intelligence, courage, accomplishments, integrity, leadership, being their own women, public image, and value to the president. Consistently, Adams has been ranked in the upper-half of first ladies by historians in these surveys. In terms of cumulative assessment, Adams has been ranked:

14th-best of 42 in 1982
16th-best of 37 in 1993
12th-best of 38 in 2003
21st-best of 38 in 2008
18th-best of 38 in 2014In the 2014 survey, Adams and her husband were also ranked the 19th-highest out of 39 first couples in terms of being a "power couple".


== Post-White House ==
After her husband lost reelection, Adams  thought that she would be retiring to Massachusetts permanently, but in 1831 her husband began seventeen years of service in the United States House of Representatives. The untimely deaths of her two oldest sons added to her burdens.
"Our union has not been without its trials," John Quincy Adams conceded. He acknowledged many "differences of sentiment, of tastes, and of opinions in regard to domestic economy, and to the education of children between us."  But added that "she always has been a faithful and affectionate wife, and a careful, tender, indulgent, and watchful mother to our children."


== Travels ==
Louisa Adams traveled with John Quincy Adams to Russia, Silesia (Poland), Germany, France, and England.


== Political contributions ==
In a time before modern political campaigns, some historians argue Louisa Catherine Adams served as her husband's unofficial campaign manager. She encouraged her husband to campaign, hosted parties at their house, and networked among political acquaintances.


== Death ==
Her husband died at the United States Capitol on February 23, 1848, after having suffered a massive stroke two days earlier. He was 80 years old. He had a state funeral in Washington, DC, and then his body was carried by train to be entombed with his parents at United First Parish Church in Quincy.She remained in Washington until her death of a heart attack on May 15, 1852, at the age of 77. The day of her funeral was the first time both houses of the United States Congress adjourned in mourning for any woman. She is entombed at her husband's side, along with her parents-in-law President John Adams and first lady Abigail Adams, in the United First Parish Church in Quincy, Massachusetts.


== Legacy ==


=== First Spouse coin ===
The First Spouse Program under the Presidential $1 Coin Act authorizes the United States Mint to issue 1⁄2-ounce $10 gold coins and medal duplicates to honor the first spouses of the United States.  Louisa Adams' coin was released May 29, 2008.


=== Museum collections ===
Adams National Historical Park maintains Peacefield, the home Adams and her husband lived in some of the time later in their lives. The park has a bedspread on display at Peacefield which she made, as well as a painting of her by Edward Savage. For some time the painting was still owned by Adams's great-great-granddaughter, Mrs. Henry L. Mason, and was loaned to the museum seasonally.The Smithsonian's National Portrait Gallery holds several portraits of Louisa Catherine Adams, including a silhouette and a portrait on an ivory necklace.


=== Adams Memorial ===
An Adams Memorial has been proposed in Washington, D.C., honoring John and Abigail Adams, John Quincy and Louisa Adams, and other members of their family.


=== Media portrayals ===
Adams was portrayed by actress Caroline Corrie in the HBO miniseries John Adams.


== Family tree ==


== Writings ==
The Diary and Autobiographical Writings of Louisa Catherine Adams: 1778–1850, two vols., The Adams Papers (Harvard University Press: 2013)
Margaret A. Hogan and C. James Taylor, editors, A Traveled First Lady: Writings of Louisa Catherine Adams (Cambridge: Belknap Press, 2014)
Narrative of a Journey from Russia to France, 1815 (Harper's Magazine): 88 


== References ==


== Further reading ==

Cook, Jane Hampton. American Phoenix: John Quincy and Louisa Adams, the War of 1812, and the Exile that Saved American Independence (Thomas Nelson: 2013)
Heffron, Margery M. Louisa Catherine: The Other Mrs. Adams (Yale University Press, 2014) x, 416 pp.
Nagel, Paul. The Adams Women: Abigail and Louisa Adams, Their Sisters and Daughters (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1987)
O'Brien, Michael. Mrs. Adams in Winter: A Journey in the Last Days of Napoleon (NY: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2010)
Schneider, Dorothy, and Carl J. Schneider, First Ladies: A Biographical Dictionary (Facts on File: 2010), "Louis Catherine Johnson Adams", 42–52
Thomas, Louisa. Louisa: The Extraordinary Life of Mrs. Adams (New York: Penguin, 2016). ISBN 9781594204630


== External links ==

Louisa Adams at C-SPAN's First Ladies: Influence & Image