Ren Han (Chinese: 任瀚; pinyin: Rén Hàn; born February 27, 1984, in Tianjin) is a Chinese contemporary artist.


== Biography ==
Ren Han was born in 1984 in Tianjin, China. He graduated from the Oil Painting Department of the Tianjin Academy of Fine Arts in 2006, then he graduated from the Villa Arson(Ecole Nationale Supérieure d’Art in Nice) in 2011 and obtained the DNSEP (National Superior Diploma of Expression of Plastic Arts). In the same year, he was selected for the Jeune Creation in France. In 2017 Ren Han won the Rock Award from Wang Shikuo Art Foundation and Today Art Museum. In 2019 he was selected for the Salon de Montrouge and received the fellowship from the French Ministry of Culture, Department of Hauts-de-Seine and city of Montrouge.

Ren Han's work can be regarded as a series of systematic researches on artistic creation, image, and visual experience, which are deeply rooted in the context of visual cultural consumption in the post-network era. His works include drawings, installations, and site-specific works. He reproduces and processes ready-made objects/images. The strange and primitive relationship between human beings and nature is the theme often discussed by Ren Han. He questions the meaning of human beings’ continuous construction and destruction driven by desire. The duality presented in his works not only denote the eternal co-existence of binary oppositions of self and other, but also the philosophical relationships of mind and matter, mind and body, as well as man and nature.

In addition to his work as an artist, He is also the co-founder of the Space Regeneration Projects.


== Exhibitions ==


=== Selected solo exhibitions ===
2020 

"Bibliothèque de Ren Han", Yishu 8 Chez Tante Martine, Paris, France2019 

"Solo Show", Raibaudi Wang Gallery, Paris2017 

"Void and Ashes", Qi Mu Space, Beijing2016 

"Mirror Image", C-Space, Beijing2015 

"Emergence", LAB 47, Beijing2014 

"Emulating Nature", C-Space, Beijing2012 

"Studiolo #2", Less Is More Projects, Paris


=== Selected group exhibitions ===
2021  

Wake-Up Call, Poush Manifesto, Paris2020  

A Kind of Form, Song Art District, Beijing2019  

A Ten Year, OWSPACE X Taikang Space, Aranya
64e Salon de Montrouge, Le Beffroi, Montrouge2017  

A New Collection of Poetry, AMNUA, Nanjing
Amassing Force – 2017 Wang Shikuo Award: Exhibition of Nominated Contemporary Artists, Today Art Museum, Beijing
Multiple Halo, XI Contemporary Center, Dongguan2016  

Puzzles, OCAT Xi'an, Xi'an
Up-Youth: Young Artists Experiment Field, Beijing Times Art Museum, Beijing
Ghost in Flash: After Photography, Taikang Space, Beijing2015  

JIMEI x ARLES International Photo Festival| Engine: The Imagetriggered Mechanism of Artistic Production, Jiageng Art Center, Xiamen
24 Art Project – Naissance, Today Art Museum, Beijing2014  

Everyday Anxiety – the 5th Jinan International Photography Biennial, Art Museum of Shandong University of Art & Design, Jinan
Look Into the Far Horizon – New Voices of Chinese Contemporary Art, Musée des Arts Asiatiques, Nice
Paper Being, Tianjin Art Museum, Tianjin2013  

Unboundedness, China Cultural Center in Berlin, Berlin
ABC, Austrian Embassy in China, Beijing
Consciousness – Exhibition of Tianjin Contemporary Artists, Tianjin Art Museum, Tianjin
Contemporary Spirituality, Eglise Saint-Louis de l'hôpital de la Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris2012  

New Directions: Young Chinese Contemporary Artists, Moscow Museum of Modern Art, Moscow2011   

Jeune Création 2011, Centquatre, Paris
Demain C’est Loin, Galerie de la Marine and Villa Arson, Nice


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website(en)(zh)
Artfacts
ARTLINKART
Salon de Montrouge


== Bibliography ==
(in French) Jeune Creation 2011, Association Jeune Creation, 2011
(in French and English) Elfi Turpin, Supplément Semaine Volume VI – Demain c'est loin, Analogues, 2011
(in French and English) Serghei Litvin, FID 2011, Le livredart, 2011