Vicharnnoi Porntawee (Thai: วิชาญน้อย พรทวี; January 25, 1948 – January 31, 2022) was a Thai Muay Thai kickboxer who competed in the 1970s. He was recognized as one of the greatest Muay Thai fighters of all time.


== Life and career ==
Vicharnnoi (or Wichannoi) was born in 1948, he grew up in the Nonthaburi province of Thailand where he started Muay Thai training around the age of 12. His first fights were for the Srimuangnon camp; he used the ring names "Vicharnnoi Luktalatkwan" and "Vicharnnoi Srimuangnon" (วิชาญน้อย ศรีเมืองนนท์) during that period. Vicharnnoi then moved to the Porntawee camp in the Buriram province.In the ring Vicharnnoi relied primarily on his hands, throwing long and powerful boxing combinations, he also was a prolific low kicker. With the use of a long guard and extreme composure he could keep a tight defense. He had a high fight IQ, studying opponents, adapting his techniques and timing to disarm a variety of styles. This allowed him to compete into his 30s at the highest level, earning him the nickname "The Immortal". He is one of the most respected Muay Thai fighters of all time by his peers.Vicharnnoi had over 200 fights during his career and faced the most fearsome fighters of his era such as Saensak Muangsurin, Pudpadnoi Worawut, Dieselnoi Chor Thanasukarn, Poot Lorlek, Padejsuk Pitsanurachan, Posai Sitiboonlert, Sirimongkol Luksiripat or Nongkhai Sor.Prapatsorn. His best purses reached 250,000 baht.In 1975 Vicharnnoi faced Poot Lorlek, this fight became the first in Muay Thai history to reach a gate of 1 million baht. They received the award of Fight of the Year for their battle.
After his retirement from competition Vicharnnoi owned a beverage delivery company and stayed in the Muay Thai sphere by sponsoring fighters who then fought under the name "Vicharnnoi Store". He was very implicated with the community of his native province where he was involved in the municipal association.Vicharnnoi died from renal failure complications on January 31, 2022, at the age of 74.


== Titles and accomplishments ==
1967 Lumpinee Stadium 112 lbs Champion (defended once)
1968 Rajadamnern Stadium 112 lbs Champion (defended once)
1974 Rajadamnern Stadium 130 lbs Champion (defended four times)Awards

1975 Fight of the Year (vs Poot Lorlek)
1977 Sports Writers Association Fighter of the Year
1980 Fight of the Year (vs Dieselnoi Chor Thanasukarn)
2014 Siam Sport Hall of Fame (Muay Thai)


== Muay Thai record ==


== See more ==
List of Muay Thai practitioners


== References ==